# Lecture notes on the Spring Framework

## Introduction to dependency injection

- Notice how there isn't any place in the application code where the `ExampleController` class is instantiated, however an instance needs to be created somewhere because the handling methods are not static.
- This instance is created automatically by Spring, when needed, via reflection. More specifically, it is created by a thing called a _context_.

- This _context_ will be responsible for a thing called _dependency injection_. To start seeing what that is, create an interface to provide greeting messages.

```
interface GreetingsMessageService {
    fun greet(): String
}
```

Then create an implementation for this interface, using a fixed array of greeting messages

```
private val greetings = arrayOf(
    "Hello Web",
    "Hi there, Web"
)

class DefaultGreetingsMessageService : GreetingsMessageService {
    var ix = 0

    override fun greet() = greetings[incrementAndGetIndex()]

    private fun incrementAndGetIndex(): Int {
        ix = (ix + 1) % greetings.size
        return ix
    }
}
```

On the `ExampleController` receive an instance of `GreetingsMessageService` as a constructor parameter, and add yet another handler that now uses this service to produce the returned string.

```
@RestController
class ExampleController(
    private val greetingsMessageService: GreetingsMessageService
) {

    ...

    @GetMapping("/examples/3")
    fun get3() = greetingsMessageService.greet()
```

- In summary:
  - We defined a interface to represent a new kind of service we need in the application - generation of greeting messages.
  - We defined a concrete implementation of that service.
  - We made the controller receive an instance of a class implementing that service.

- Notice that the controller does create the service instance, namely the controller doesn't control the concrete type for the service.
  - Instead, it just receives the service as construction parameter.
  - It is the code that creates the controller that is also in charge of creating the concrete service instance and pass it to the controller constructor.
  - This style of design is called _Inversion of Control_ (IoC)
    - The using class (the controller) doesn't control the service instance. It just receives it and uses it when needed.
    - We say that the service is now a _dependency_ of the controller - something the controller needs to operate but that it doens't create.

- Build, start the application, and notice that there is an error during the application startup

```
Exception encountered during context initialization - cancelling refresh attempt: org.springframework.beans.factory.UnsatisfiedDependencyException: Error creating bean with name 'exampleController' defined in file
```

- There are two parts in this message that are significant
  - First, the `Exception encountered during context initialization`.
  - Then, the `Error creating bean with name 'exampleController'`.

- What is the `context` and what are `beans`:
  - The `context` is the Spring component responsible for instantiating and managing instances, such as controller instances.
  - A `bean` is an object that is created and managed by the context.
  - That is

- The error message also includes the following

```
Unsatisfied dependency expressed through constructor parameter 0; nested exception is org.springframework.beans.factory.NoSuchBeanDefinitionException: No qualifying bean of type 'pt.isel.daw.spring.demo.GreetingsService' available: expected at least 1 bean which qualifies as autowire candidate. Dependency annotations: {}
```

- This is telling us that in order to create an instance of `ExampleController`, an instance of `GreetingsService` is required. However the context doesn't have and doesn't know how to create one.
  - By now, you may be questioning: why doesn't the context create and use an instance of `DefaultGreetingsService`? 
  - The answer is that Spring ignores classes that aren't explicitly annotated as being able to be managed by the context.

- Add the annotation `@Component` to `DefaultGreetingsService`, build and start the application again.
  - Not the application starts without any error, because the context took `DefaultGreeingsService` into consideration when needing to resolve the `ExampleController` dependency.

## A bigger example

See [LsExample.kt](../code/jvm/spring-demo/src/main/kotlin/pt/isel/daw/spring/context/demo/LsExample.kt)

- Directly use of `AnnotationConfigApplicationContext` instance, constructed with:
  - The `Class<T>` instances for the _bean_ classes.
  - The `Class<T>` instance for the _configuration_ class.

- Bean graph replaying a typical LS project, with a router, command handlers, a transaction manager, and a data source.

- Note the type of error that exists when a dependency cannot be resolved.

- Note how the configuration class can be used to contain _bean definition methods_.

- Note how the configuration class can be used to enable _component scan_

- See different lifetimes, namely:
  - `Singleton`.
  - `Prototype`.

## Documentation

- [The IoC Container](https://docs.spring.io/spring-framework/docs/current/reference/html/core.html#beans)
  - Feel free to skip the XML-based definition parts.
  - See [Java-based Container Configuration](https://docs.spring.io/spring-framework/docs/current/reference/html/core.html#beans-java).
