# An introduction to React

- The user interface (UI) for a browser window (i.e. tab) is defined by the contents of the DOM tree, where DOM stands for Document Object Model.
  - This tree is composed by DOM nodes, which include element nodes (simply called elements) or text nodes.
  - Changing the UI equates to changing this tree.
    - E.g. removing a row from a table is performed by removing the associated element node, and its descendent subtree from the DOM tree.

```js
TODO - example
```

- [React](https://reactjs.org/) is a library to manipulate trees that represent user interfaces, including the browser's DOM tree.
  - React is dividided into a host-independent part and a host-dependent part.
    - The host-dependent part knows how to manipulate a specific tree, such as the browser's DOM tree or [Android view tree](https://github.com/facebook/react-native). The host specific part is also called a _renderer_.
    - The host-independent part is used to create _tree representations_, before they are applied to a host specific tree.
    - The [https://www.npmjs.com/package/react] NPM package contains the host-independent part.
    - The [https://www.npmjs.com/package/react-dom] NPM contains the browser specific part.

- The way React is used to control the UI is based on the concept of [_virtual DOM_](https://reactjs.org/docs/faq-internals.html).
  - A application defines the UI by using the React API to create a _virtual DOM tree_ that reflects the end goal for the UI state.
    - This is done **independently** of the current state of the DOM tree.
    - This way, the application doesn't need to track the previous state of the DOM tree (e.g. doesn't need to store DOM elements or their identifiers).
  - React then _reconciliates_ the state of the virtual DOM tree with the state of the real DOM tree.
    - This reconciliation includes creating, removing, or chaning existing DOM trees.
  - Example: consider a use case where an array of numbers must be represented as an `ul` element, with a `li` per each number.
    - Initially, the application will create a virtual tree with a single virtual `ul` and one virtual `li` per number.
    - Then, React will make sure the DOM tree reflects this virtual tree.
    - When an element of the array is deleted and the application want to reflect that in UI, it uses React to generate a complete virtual tree with a new virtual `ul` and a virtual `li` of each of the remaining numbers.
      - Applications never mutate a the virtual tree after it is generated. Instead, they create a new DOM tree.
    - It's React job to reconciliate the new virtual tree with the existing DOM tree, which can be done by removing the `li` node associated with the removed number.
    - Sometimes React needs extra information to help with the reconciliation process. 
      - An example is the `key` property, which needs to be added when creating sequences of elements of the same _type_.
      - When a new sequence is represented in the virtual tree, React will use the `key`'s value to determine which elements represent are new UI _things_ and which represent things that were already there.
      - Important: virtual DOM tree elements are never reused; a new virtual tree is always composed by newly created elements. However, these newly created elements can _represent_ already existing UI things.

- Virtual tree nodes are created by using the `React.createElement` function or by using the JSX syntax, which is converted to calls to `React.createElement`.
  - These virtual tree elements are never mutated after they are created. Again, changing the UI is done by creating a new virtual tree, or virtual subtree as we will see aftwerwards.
  - React elements (i.e. the virtual tree nodes) are simple JS objects and are much less costly to create than real DOM nodes.
  - A virtual tree element is build using three things:
    - the name of the associated DOM element HMTL name (e.g. `div`, `p`, or `input`).
      - Note that the JSX fragment `<p>hello</p>` result in `React.createElement('p', null, 'Hello')` - the first argument to `createElement` is the string `'p'`.
    - An object with the attributes that the DOM element should have (e.g. `{type: 'text'}`).
    - The array of child virtual elements.

- In addition to the concept of virtual DOM, React also defines the concept of _component_.
  - A component is a way to define a set of UI behaviour in a single _thing_ that can be used and reused multiple times.
  - Defining the set of components and their behavior is a significant part of designing a React-based application.

- Components are used when defining a virtual tree, similarly to how HTML element names are used.
  - Components act as _high-level_ HTML elements that can be defined by the application or by libraries.

```
<div>
  <p>Note the use of a component below</p>
  <MyComponent awesome="of-course" />
</div>  
```

(equivalent JS)
```
React.createElement('div', null, 
  React.createElement('p', null, 'Note the use of a component below'), 
  React.createElement(MyComponent, { awesome: 'of-course' })
)
```

On the previous example, note:
- How the virtual tree uses elements created with the strings `'div'` and `'p'` and the identifier (not string) `MyComponent`.
- JSX uses the following convention to distinguish between HTML elements and components.
  - If the identifier in JSX starts with a lower case, it is converted to a `createElement` call using a string containing the identifier
  - If the identifier in JSX starts with an upper case, it is converted to a `createElement` call using the identifier directly. 

- React components can be defined by functions or by classes (which are an indirect way of defining a function).
  - Our focus will be mostly on defining components by functions. 


